R2 - Coefficient of Determination
=================================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 2

The **Coefficient of Determination** (denoted strictly as **COD** or **R2** in ``permetrics``) :cite:`nguyen2021nqsv` is a statistical metric that represents the proportion of variance in the dependent variable that has been explained by the independent variables in the model.

It provides a measure of how well unseen samples are likely to be predicted by the model through the proportion of explained variance.

.. math::

    \text{R2}(y, \hat{y}) = 1 - \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{N} (y_i - \hat{y}_i)^2}{\sum_{i=1}^{N} (y_i - \bar{y})^2}

Note: :math:`\bar{y} = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^{N} y_i` is the mean of the observed data.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. warning:: The Misunderstanding of "R-Squared"
   Many popular frameworks (including Scikit-Learn and MATLAB) erroneously denote this metric mathematically as :math:`R^2` (R-squared). This is a historical nomenclature flaw that leads to severe mathematical misunderstandings, as users frequently confuse it with the actual square of Pearson’s Correlation Coefficient.

   Because this metric calculates explained variance based on residual errors (which can be infinitely large), **its range can be negative**. A true mathematically squared value (:math:`x^2`) cannot be negative. Therefore, ``permetrics`` explicitly denotes this metric as **R2** or **COD**, reserving the term "R-Squared" solely for the squared Pearson's Correlation Coefficient.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description
-----------

**Advantages**: Highly intuitive for evaluating model skill.
    * ``R2 = 1.0``: Perfect predictions.
    * ``R2 = 0.0``: The model is merely predicting the expected mean of the actual values, disregarding the input features entirely.
    * ``R2 < 0.0``: The model performs worse than a simple horizontal line predicting the mean.

**Disadvantages:**
	* **Dataset dependency:** Because the variance is strictly dependent on the specific dataset, R2 scores are generally not meaningfully comparable across different datasets.
	* **Sensitivity to outliers:** Since residual errors in the numerator are squared, a single extreme outlier can drastically pull the R2 score down into negative territory.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Properties
----------

* **Best possible score:** ``1.0`` (Bigger value is better).
* **Range:** ``(-inf, 1.0]``
* **Mathematical Reference:** `Scikit-Learn Model Evaluation <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/model_evaluation.html#r2-score>`_

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Example Usage
-------------

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 10, 18

    from numpy import array
    from permetrics.regression import RegressionMetric

    ## 1. For 1-D array (Single-output)
    y_true = array([3, -0.5, 2, 7])
    y_pred = array([2.5, 0.0, 2, 8])

    evaluator = RegressionMetric(y_true, y_pred)
    # Calculate Coefficient of Determination
    print("R2: ", evaluator.COD())

    ## 2. For > 1-D array (Multi-output)
    y_true = array([[0.5, 1], [-1, 1], [7, -6]])
    y_pred = array([[0, 2], [-1, 2], [8, -5]])

    evaluator = RegressionMetric(y_true, y_pred)
    # Return an array of scores for each column
    print("R2 (Multi-output): ", evaluator.R2(multi_output="raw_values"))
